How Personality Traits and Attitudes, Moral Development, and the Situation Affect Ethical Behavior 

Personality Traits and Attitudes
Our ethical behavior is related to our individual needs and personality traits.Leaders with surgency (dominance) personality traits have two choices: to use power for personal benefit or to use socialized power. To gain power and to be conscientious with high achievement, some people will use unethical behavior; also, irresponsible people often do not perform to standard by cutting corners and other behavior which may be considered unethical. An agreeableness personality sensitive to others can lead to following the crowd in either ethical or unethical behavior; having a high self-concept tends to lead to doing what the person believes is right and not following  the crowd’s unethical behavior. Emotionally unstable people and those with external locus of control (they do not take personal responsibility for their behavior—it is not their fault) are more likely to use unethical behavior. Being ethical is part of integrity. People open to new experiences are often ethical. People with positive attitudes about ethics tend to be more ethical than those with negative or weak attitudes about ethics. But personality alone is not a good predictor of unethical behavior.

Moral Development
A second factor affecting ethical behavior is moral development, which refers to understanding right from wrong and choosing to do the right thing.85 Our ability to make ethical choices is related to our level of moral development.86 There are three levels of personal moral development, as discussed in Exhibit 2.6.

EXHIBIT 2.6 Levels of Moral Development
3. Postconventional
Behavior is motivated by universal principles of right and wrong, regardless of the expectations of the leader or group. One seeks to balance the concerns for self with those of others and the common good. He or she will follow ethical principles even if they violate the law at the risk of social rejection, economic loss, and physical punishment (Martin Luther King, Jr., broke what he considered unjust laws and spent time in jail seeking universal dignity and justice).
“I don’t lie to customers because it is wrong.”
The common leadership style is visionary and committed to serving others and a higher cause while empowering followers to reach this level.
2. Conventional
Living up to expectations of acceptable behavior defined by others motivates behavior to fulfill duties and obligations. It is common for followers to copy the behavior of the leaders and group. If the group (can be society/organization/department) accepts lying, cheating, stealing, and so on, when dealing with customers/suppliers/government/competitors, so will the individual. On the other hand, if these behaviors are not accepted, the individual will not do them either. Peer pressure is used to enforce group norms.
“I lie to customers because the other sales reps do it too.”
It is common for lower-level managers to use a similar leadership style of the higher level managers.
1. Preconventional
Self-interest motivates behavior to meet one’s own needs to gain rewards while following rules and being obedient to authority to avoid punishment.
“I lie to customers to sell more products and get higher commission checks.”
The common leadership style is autocratic toward others while using one’s position for personal advantage.
Source: Adapted from Lawrence Kohlberg, “Moral Stages and Moralization: The Cognitive-Development Approach.” In Thomas Likona (ed.), Moral Development and Behavior: Theory, Research, and Social Issues (Austin, TX: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1976), 31–53.


At the first level, preconventional, you choose right and wrong behavior based on your self-interest and the consequences (reward and punishment). People at 
this level often end up using unethical behavior not only because it was to their advantage, but also because they had created their own rationale for what was acceptable.87 Therefore, there is a need for codes of ethics in order to standardize ethical behavior. With ethical reasoning at the second level, conventional, you  seek to maintain expected standards and live up to the expectations of others. One does what the others do. Around 60 percent of  workers admit to stealing pens and pencils from their office supply rooms,88 at an estimated cost to businesses of $52 billion a year.89 Does this mean it is ethical? At the third level, postconventional, you make an effort to define moral principles regardless of leader or group ethics. Although most of us have the ability to reach the third level of moral development, postconventional, only about 20 percent of people reach this level. Most people behave at the second level, conventional, while some have not advanced beyond the first level, preconventional. How do you handle peer pressure? What level of moral development are you on? What can you do to further develop your ethical behavior? We will discuss how to be an ethical leader.

The Situation
Our third factor affecting ethical behavior is the situation. People consider the situational forces in determining ethical conduct.90 Highly competitive and unsupervised situations increase the odds of unethical behavior. Unethical behavior occurs more often when there is no formal ethics policy or code of ethics, and when unethical behavior is not punished, and it is especially prevalent when it is rewarded. People are also less likely to report unethical behavior (blow the whistle) when they perceive the violation as not being serious and when the offenders are their friends.91

To tie the three factors affecting ethical behavior together, we need to realize that personality traits and attitudes and moral development interact with the situation to determine if a person will use ethical or unethical behavior.92 In this chapter we use the individual level of analysis, meaning: Am I ethical, and how can I improve my ethical behavior? At the organizational level, many firms offer training programs and develop codes of ethics to help employees behave ethically. The organizational level of analysis is examined in Part Three of this book; therefore, ethics and whistleblowing will be further discussed in Chapter 10.

