Situational Factors

Subordinate
Subordinate situational characteristics follow:
1. Authoritarianism is the degree to which employees defer to others, and want to be told what to do and how to do the job.
2. Locus of control (Chapter 2) is the extent to which employees believe they control goal achievement (internal) or if goal achievement is controlled by others (external).
3. Ability is the extent of the employees’ ability to perform tasks to achieve goals.

Environment
Environment situational factors follow:
1. Task structure is the extent of repetitiveness of the job.
2. Formal authority is the extent of the leader’s position power. Note that task structure and formal authority are essentially the same as Fiedler’s.
3. Work group is the extent to which coworkers contribute to job satisfaction or the relationship between followers. Note that House identifies work group as a situational variable. However, under the contingency framework, it would be considered a follower variable.


Ethical Dilemma 2
Drug Research
Several drug companies, including Glaxo-SmithKline (Paxil antidepressant drug) and Merck (Vioxx arthritis pain medication) have been accused of situationally favorable 
research reporting. When results support the use of the drug, they are reported; when they don’t, results are not reported. Although all medications have side effects, 
some drug users have died because of medication. As a result, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has been criticized for its process of approving drugs and moni
toring their safety.
1. Is it ethical and socially responsible to report only the results that help gain FDA approval of drugs?
2. If you worked for a drug company and knew that the results of a study showed negative effects, but were not included in a report, what would you do?
3. If you worked for a drug company and your boss asked you to change negative results into positive results, or to make results even better, what would you do?
4. What would you do if you gave your boss a negative report on a drug and found out the results were changed to positive results?
5. Is the FDA doing a good job of monitoring the safety of drugs? If not, what else should it do?