The Influence of LMX on Follower Behavior
The underlying assumption of LMX is that leaders do not interact with all followers equally, which ultimately results in the formation of leader–member exchange relations that vary in quality. Followers with strong social ties to the leader (high LMX) are said to belong to the in-group while those with weak social ties to the leader (low LMX) are said to belong to the out-group. As revealed earlier, being a member of the in-group puts you in a very favorable position. For example, in-group followers routinely receive higher performance ratings than out-group followers; outgroup followers routinely show higher levels of turnover than in-group  followers; 
and, finally, when asked to evaluate organizational climate, in-group followers give more positive ratings than out-group followers.

However, the special relationship with in-group followers creates certain obligations and constraints for the leader.31 To maintain the relationship, the leader must 
continuously pay attention to in-group members, remain responsive to their needs and feelings, and rely more on time-consuming influence methods such as persuasion and consultation. The leader cannot resort to coercion or heavy-handed use of authority without endangering the quality of the relationship. The followers are 
therefore said to have developed social capital, defined as the set of resources that inheres in the structure of relations between members of the group, which helps them get ahead.32,33
The basis for establishing a deeper exchange relationship with in-group  members is the leader’s control over outcomes that are desirable to the followers. These out
comes include such benefits as helping with a follower’s career (for example, recommending advancement), giving special favors (bigger office, better work schedule), 
allowing participation in decision making, delegating greater responsibility and authority, more sharing of information, assigning in-group members to interesting 
and  desirable tasks, and giving tangible rewards such as a pay increase. In return for these benefits, in-group members have certain obligations and expectations beyond those required of out-group members. In-group members are expected to be loyal to the leader, to be more committed to task objectives, to work harder, and to share some of the leader’s administrative duties.

To the leader this also represents social capital that gives him or her power and influence over followers. Unless this cycle of reciprocal reinforcement of leader 
and member behavior is interrupted, the relationship is likely to develop to a point where there is a high degree of mutual dependence, support, and loyalty. Organizational culture, and more specifically respect for people, plays a key role in protecting the cycle and strengthening the relationship between perceptions of 
fairness and LMX.34

A number of studies have demonstrated that the quality of LMX is central in influencing followers’ affective, cognitive, and behavioral experiences; roles; 
and fate in their organizations.35,36 Studies focusing on these outcomes have explored such factors as communication frequency, turnover, job satisfaction, performance, job climate, and commitment.37,38 High-quality LMX relationships are characterized by higher levels of leader support and guidance, higher 
levels of follower satisfaction and performance, wide latitude of discretion for followers, and lower levels of follower turnover.39,40,41 Also, the positive relationship between LMX and follower job satisfaction is stronger when leaders have high perceived organizational support (POS) because these leaders feel they 
have more resources to exchange with followers.42 Compared to employees in low-quality LMXs, high-quality LMX employees exhibit greater organizational citizenship behavior.43

In-Group and Out-Group
Based on Self-Assessment 1 on pages 241–242 and your reading of VDL and LMX theory, place the people who work or have worked for your present or past manager in the in-group or out-group. Be sure to include yourself.
