The Three-Stage Process for Developing Positive LMX Relations

The development of relationships in a leader–member exchange dyad has been described as a “life-cycle model” with three possible stages. Each of these stages is 
described below.

Stage 1
At this early stage, the leader and follower conduct themselves as strangers, testing each other to identify what kinds of behavior are acceptable. Each relationship is negotiated informally between each follower and the leader. The definition of each group member’s role determines what the leader expects the member to do. Here, 
impressions management by the follower plays a critical role in influencing how the leader perceives him or her. Impressions management is a follower’s effort to project a favorable image in order to gain an immediate benefit or improve a long-term relationship with the leader. Employees seeking to form a positive relationship with the leader will often be the ones seeking feedback on how to improve their work performance. Researchers have identified two kinds of motives associated with follower feedback seeking behavior: performance-driven motive and impressions-driven motive. The 
performance-driven motive is the follower’s genuine attempt to seek information from the leader that will help improve work performance, while the impressions driven motive refers to the desire to control how one appears to the leader.44

Another tactic for influencing a leader is ingratiation. Ingratiation is the effort to appear supportive, appreciative, and respectful. Ingratiatory influence tactics include favor rendering, self-promotion, and behavioral conformity. In this instance, followers go beyond 
the call of duty to render services to the leader and to conform their behavior to the expectations of the leader. Self-promotion is the effort to appear competent and dependable. Studies have found a positive correlation between ingratiation by a follower and affection (or liking) of the leader for the follower. Affection, in turn, is positively related to the quality of the exchange relationship and the leader’s assessment of the follower’s competence, loyalty, commitment, and work ethic. These tactics are valuable tools that can enhance the visibility of the follower’s strengths and performance. However, others caution that these tactics can have a negative effect on the LMX relationship in that leaders may discount or devalue the follower’s attempts, if deemed to be self-serving.45 Therefore, one’s social skills are critical in influencing the leader–member relations.

Stage 2
As the leader and follower become acquainted, they engage in further refining the roles they will play together. Mutual trust, loyalty, and respect begin to develop 
between leader and follower. During this stage, the perceived fairness of leaders is crucial. When the leader is perceived as fair and benevolent in his or her intentions, followers will infer from this that the leader is committed to them, and high-quality exchanges result.46 Followers in this type of relationship are more likely to be very proactive. Some have argued that high-quality social exchanges can give organizations a competitive advantage in retaining and motivating talented  
employees. Relationships that do not mature beyond the first stage may deteriorate and remain at the level of an out-group. As described earlier, in the out-group 
exchange, there is less social interaction and followers are afforded limited opportunities to influence decisions or interact informally with leaders.
 
Stage 3
Some exchange relationships advance to a third stage as the roles reach maturity. Here, exchange based on self-interest is transformed into mutual commitment to the 
mission and objectives of the work unit. It would appear from examining these three stages that the end result of the life cycle model of LMX relationships is the creation of actual and perceived differences between in-group (high-quality LMX) and outgroup (low-quality LMX) members. Critics point out that these differences could lead to intergroup conflicts and undermine teamwork within the broader work unit.47