Factors that Determine LMX Quality
Behavioral and situational factors influence the creation of high- or low-quality leader-member exchange relationships. LMX relationship antecedents include (1) follower attributes, (2) leader and follower perceptions of each other, and (3) situational factors. Each is briefly discussed. 

Follower Attributes
The difference between contingency theories and LMX is that while the former emphasizes how a good leader facilitates employee job performance, the latter 
emphasizes how a good employee facilitates leader job performance.48 The leadermember exchange model suggests that proactive followers show initiative even in 
areas outside their immediate responsibility, possess a strong sense of commitment to work unit goals, and show a greater sense of responsibility for unit success. These follower attributes influence leaders to show support, delegate more, allow greater discretion, engage in open communication, and encourage mutual influence 
between themselves and their followers.49

Leader–Follower Perceptions of Each Other
The leader’s first impressions of the follower can influence the leader’s behavior toward the follower. A positive relationship is more likely when the follower is 
perceived to be competent and dependable, and when the follower’s values and attitudes are similar to those of the leader. The same is true for the follower’s percep
tions of the leader. A favorable exchange relationship is said to correlate with more supportive behavior by the leader toward the follower, less close monitoring, more mentoring, and more involvement and delegation. From the follower’s perspective, leaders that are perceived to be competent, experienced, fair, and honest are more likely to be supported, encounter fewer pressure tactics (for example, threats and demands), and receive more honest input.50 One study’s findings revealed that 
transformational leadership relationships were significantly stronger for followers who perceived high-quality leader–member exchange.51

Situational Factors
Situational factors are used here to refer to random or planned events that provide the opportunity for leaders to evaluate a follower’s work ethic or character. 
Follower reaction to “tryouts,” described as “role episodes,” will give leaders clues about employees.52,53 For example, a manager asks a new employee to do something 
beyond what the formal employment agreement calls for. The new employee’s reaction (“sure, glad to help,” versus a grumble, or “that’s not my job” attitude) 
indicates potential loyalty, support, and trustworthiness, and leads to more—versus fewer—opportunities for responsibility, personal growth, and other positive experiences. The perception of the leader from this tryout will greatly influence the type of relationship or social exchange that ensues between the leader and the follower. Followers perceived to be hardworking and willing to go the extra mile for the leader have a higher-quality exchange relationship with the leader than those who are perceived to be lazy or unwilling to go the extra mile for the leader.54