How People Justify Unethical Behavior

Most people understand right and wrong behavior and have a conscience. So why do good people do bad things? When most people use unethical behavior, it is not due to some type of character flaw or being born a bad person. Few people see themselves as unethical. We all want to view ourselves in a positive manner. Therefore, when we do use unethical behavior, we often justify the behavior to protect our self-concept so that we don’t have a guilty conscience or feel remorse. We rationalize with statements like “everybody does it” and “I deserve it.”93 Let’s discuss several thinking processes used to justify unethical behavior.

Moral justification is the process of reinterpreting immoral behavior in terms of a higher 
purpose. The terrorists of 9/11 killed innocent people, as do suicide bombers; yet they believe their killing is for the good and that they will go to heaven for their actions. People state that they have conducted unethical behavior (lie about a competitor to hurt its reputation, fix prices, steal confidential information, and so on) for the good of the organization or employees.

People at the postconventional level of moral development may seek higher purpose (Martin Luther King, Jr.), as well as those at lower levels. However, people at the preconventional and conventional levels of moral development more commonly use the following justifications:

• Displacement of responsibility is the process of blaming one’s unethical behavior on others. “I was only following orders; my boss told me to inflate the figures.”

• Diffusion of responsibility is the process of the group using the unethical behavior with no one person being held responsible. “We all take bribes/kickbacks; it’s the way we do business,” or “We all take merchandise home (steal).” As related to conventional morality, peer pressure is used to enforce group norms.94

• Advantageous comparison is the process of comparing oneself to others who are worse. 
“I call in sick when I’m not sick only a few times a year; Tom and Ellen do it all the time.” “We pollute less than our competitors do.”

• Disregard or distortion of consequences is the process of minimizing the harm caused by the unethical behavior. “If I inflate the figures, no one will be hurt and I will not get caught. And if I do, I’ll just get a slap on the wrist anyway.” Was this the case at Enron?

• Attribution of blame is the process of claiming the unethical behavior was caused by someone else’s behavior. “It’s my coworker’s fault that I repeatedly hit him and put him in the hospital. He called me/did xxx, so I had to hit him.”

• Euphemistic labeling is the process of using “cosmetic” words to make the behavior sound acceptable. Terrorist group sounds bad but freedom fighter sounds justifiable. Misleading or covering up sounds better than lying to others.

Which justification processes have you used? How can you improve your ethical behavior by not using justification?
Ethical Dilemma 2
Sex and Violence
Over the years, various social activist groups, including the Parents Television Council, the National Viewers and Listeners Association, and the National Coalition Against Censorship, have taken a stance for and against censorship of sex and violence on TV and in the movies. People call for more censorship to protect children from seeing sex and violence (many children watch as many as five hours of TV per day), while others don’t want censorship, stating it violates free speech laws.

Advocates for less regulation state that TV shows like CSI: Crime Scene Investigation are shown late at night while children should not be watching. However, advocates of regulation state the fact than many daytime soap operas are sexual and that cable stations show reruns of major network shows in the daytime and early evening when children are watching. For example, many of the former Seinfeld shows were based on sexual themes, and the show was not aired until 9:00, but now it is shown on cable stations at all hours. Sex and the City is aired in California at 7:00.

1. Does the media (TV, movies, and music) influence societal values?
2. Does the media, with sex and violence, reflect current religious and societal values?
3. The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) has the power to regulate television. Should the FCC regulate the media, and if yes, how far should it go? Should it require toning down the sex and violence, or take shows like Sex and the City off the air?
4. Is it ethical and socially responsible to show sex and violence against women, and 
to portray women as sex objects?
5. Which of the six justifications of unethical behavior does the media use to defend sex and violence?
