Charismatic versus Transformational Leadership

Some authors make no distinction between the charismatic and the transformational leader, preferring to combine them into one theory. They refer to the two 
theories as charismatic because charisma is a central concept in both of them, either explicitly or implicitly. Others have conceptualized charisma as one of several attributes that may define the transformational leader. The other attributes include honesty, optimism, communication skills, confidence, and consideration. 
It adds another dimension of behavior traits of the leader. Charisma is seen as just one of a collection of attributes that may explain transformational leadership 
behavior. Yet, charisma is relational in nature. It is not something found solely in the leader as a psychological phenomenon, nor is it totally situationally deter
mined. Instead, charisma manifests itself in the interplay between the leader (his or her traits and behaviors) and the follower (his or her values, needs, perceptions, and beliefs).

There is general agreement that charismatic leaders by nature are transformational, but not all transformational leaders achieve their transforming results through the charismatic effects of their personalities. According to this viewpoint, some transformational leaders lacking in charisma may still be able to influence and inspire others by meeting the emotional needs of their followers through individualized consideration, and/or they may intellectually stimulate their followers through rationalizing the need for change, involvement of followers into possible solutions, and the passion to bring about resolution. One prominent leader who comes to mind is Bill Gates. Many will agree that he is definitely a transformational leader, but few will label him as a charismatic leader. He has led not only the transformation of Microsoft as a leader in the computer software industry, but also transformed our society in the way we use computer technology to better our lives.

From a power and moral leadership perspective, charismatic and transformational leadership overlap as well as support and reinforce each other. A leader 
like Nelson Mandela has been described as charismatic and transformational. Mandela is known to live by the tenets of consultation, persuasion, and cohabitation, and shuns co ercion and domination. Transformational leaders seek to trans
form or change the basic values, beliefs, and attitudes of followers so that they are willing to perform beyond the minimum levels specified by the organization. Transformational leaders are similar to charismatic leaders in that they can articulate a compelling vision of the future and influence followers by arousing strong 
emotions in support of the vision.

Transformational leaders can emerge from different levels of the organization. Therefore, an organization may have many transformational leaders. In contrast, charismatic leaders are few in number. Charismatic leaders are most likely to emerge in the throes of a crisis, when an organization is in turmoil because 
of conflicting value and belief systems. The response by people to a charismatic or transformational leader is often highly polarized, because those with the most to 
lose by abandoning the old system will put up the most resistance to any change initiative. Additionally, it would appear that the emotional levels of resistance 
toward  charismatic leaders are more extreme than those toward transformational leaders. This may be the underlying cause for the untimely, violent deaths of some charismatic leaders (such as Malcolm X, Martin Luther King, Jr., John F. Kennedy, and Mahatma Gandhi). Both charismatic and transformational leadership always 
involve conflict and change, and both types of leaders must be willing to embrace conflict, create enemies, make unusual allowances for self-sacrifice, and be extraor
dinarily focused in order to achieve and institutionalize their vision.