Transformational versus Transactional Leadership

Begin this section by completing Self-Assessment 1 to determine if you are more of a transactional or transformational leader.

Using Weber’s seminal work on charismatic leaders as his base, Burns conceptualized that leadership occurs in one of two ways—transformational or  transactional.113 
The transactional leadership process involves an exchange of valued benefits, based on present values and motivations of both leaders and followers. It therefore 
revolves around the leader–follower exchange (LMX), in which the leader rewards the follower for specific behaviors and performance that meets with the leader’s 
expectations and punishes or criticizes behavior or performance that does not meet expectations.114 Such exchanges cater to the self-interest of followers, while 
transformational leadership inspires followers to go beyond self-interest and act for the good of the organization.115,116 Transformational leadership motivates followers by appealing to higher ideals and moral values.

Some scholars refer to transactional leaders as managers and transformational leaders as leaders. These scholars hold the view that leadership and management 
are not interchangeable. They argue that leadership is about developing and communicating a vision and the objectives and strategies for realizing such a vision; 
while management’s role is to plan, organize, and implement the leader’s vision. Managers, it is argued, serve as the means to achieve the leader’s ends.117 Leaders rated as transformational are described as influential, inspirational, and charismatic, whereas leaders rated as transactional are described as task- and reward oriented, structured, and passive.118,119

Transformational leadership serves to change the status quo by articulating to followers the problems in the current system and a compelling vision of what a 
new organization could be. The transactional leader enters into specific contractual arrangements with followers. In exchange for meeting specified objectives or 
performing certain duties, the leader provides benefits that satisfy followers’ needs and desires.120 An example of transactional leadership occurs when managers give 
monthly bonuses to salespeople for meeting and exceeding their monthly sales quotas, or to production people for exceeding quality standards.

Transactional leadership is conceptually similar to the cultural maintenance form of leadership, which acts to clarify or strengthen existing tasks, work standards, and outcomes. Some scholars have proposed that transactional leadership consist of three dimensions—contingent reward, management by exception, and passive leadership. 
Depending on a leader’s personality traits, each dimension represents an option that can be employed to shape strategies and structures, reward subordinates’ efforts and commitment, and take corrective action to address mistakes and deviations from expectations; all efforts aim at achieving established organizational performance goals.121

Transactional leadership tends to be transitory, in that once a transaction is completed the relationship between the parties may end or be redefined. Transformational 
leadership is more enduring, especially when the change process is well designed and implemented. Transactional leaders promote stability, while transformational leaders create significant change in both followers and organizations.

Managing knowledge effectively can provide firms with sustainable competitive advantages. The process of managing knowledge involves three processes—creating, sharing, and exploiting knowledge. Leaders play a critical role in each of these processes. A study of these constructs concluded that transformational leadership may be more effective in creating and sharing knowledge at the individual and group levels, while transactional leadership is more effective at exploiting knowledge at the organizational level.122 Research examining the degree to which cultural values and norms influence follower receptivity to different leadership styles found that transformational leaders inspire by emphasizing the importance of group values and focusing on collective interests, while transactional leaders tend to focus more on defining roles and task requirements and offering rewards that are contingent on task fulfillment.123 This explains why transactional leadership is also referred to 
as contingent reward leadership.

Despite these differences, it is worth mentioning that effective leaders exhibit both transactional and transformational leadership skills in appropriate situations.124 Bernard Bass argued that contrary to Burns’s assertion that transformational and transactional leadership are at opposite ends of a single continuum of leadership, the two approaches are actually interdependent and complementary. A meta-analytic test of the relative validity of transformational and transactional leadership styles confimed Bass’s assertion. The study revealed that both are valid approaches for achieving organizational objectives, with transformational leadership showing the highest overall relations and transactional or contingent reward leadership a close second.125,126


