Values-Based Leadership
Values-based leadership examines the influence of an executive’s values upon the strategic development of an organization.86,87 It is a concept that applies not only 
to larger corporations but to small and medium enterprises as well.88 Values are generalized beliefs or behaviors that are considered by an individual or a group to be important. Values permeate our lives and influence our actions.

A leader’s decisions and actions reflect his or her personal values and beliefs. Integrity and strong values are considered to be vital traits of good leadership.89 
These traits influence the level of trust that followers have in a leader. Some have argued that trust is central to all transactions.90 Relationships between leaders and members of an organization are based on shared values and trust. The impact of followers’ trust in their leaders cannot be underestimated.

Values-based leadership is also about courage and character. Character provides the moral compass for decision making, especially the tough decisions.91 
Courageous leaders are able to speak out to right wrongs, admit to personal weaknesses, and own up to mistakes. How leaders’ ethical values influence follower 
behavior and performance is the subject of values-based leadership.92,93 Followers take their cue from the leader, which is why the role of the leader in developing the organization’s culture is critical.94

The results of a study on the effect of leadership on values-based management revealed that the leader’s values and behaviors were significantly related to the 
values and behaviors of subordinates.95 Leaders are key in building a values-driven organization.96 When it comes to upholding high moral values, Dr. Martin Luther 
King, Jr. was a leader who “talked the talk and walked the talk.” He was the embodiment of charismatic, transformational, and values-based leadership.97

In some cases the values of the organization, espoused by the CEO, violate society’s ethical standards or are not in line with the values of other members of top management. The effect of such perceived organizational value dissimilarity is that it can lead to relationship and task conflicts and affect follower satisfaction and commitment.98

In a recent New York Times article titled “Where Have All the Chief Financial Officers Gone?” the writer explored the dilemma that confronts some financial 
executives: what to do if your values do not reflect those of your organization. Lately, given the high-profile accounting scandals in the news, CFOs have found themselves in the position of being the culture’s ethical benchmark in their organizations.

In this section, we will examine the leader’s role in advocating and enforcing ethical behavior using such tools as a code of ethics handbook, ethics committees, 
training programs, and disclosure mechanisms. However, before we begin, complete Self-Assessment 1 to determine your personal values in eight areas.
