The Leader’s Role in Advocating Ethical Behavior
Studies have found that many successful companies (those with measurable bottom-line revenue and profitability results) are distinguished by their commitment to strong organizational values that emphasize ethical behavior.99,100 These are the companies that emphasize ethical and socially responsible behavior 
throughout the organization. Many values make up an organization’s culture, but the one that is considered most critical for leaders is ethics. Recall from Chapter 2 that ethics consists of the standards of right and wrong that influence behavior; in Self-Assessment 6 on page 52–53 you determined how ethical your behavior is. Ethics provides guidelines for judging conduct and decision making. However, for an organization to display consistently high ethical standards, top leadership must 
model ethical and moral conduct.101

Values-based leaders cultivate a high level of trust and respect from members, based not just on stated values but on their willingness to make personal sacrifices 
for the sake of upholding values.102 A leader’s ethics reflect the contributions of diverse inputs, including personal beliefs, family, peers, religion, education, and 
experiences in the broader society. The family and religious upbringing of leaders often influence the principles by which they conduct business. A leader’s personal 
beliefs may enable him or her to pursue an ethical choice even if the decision is unpopular. Some of the tools available for leaders to use in enforcing ethical behavior are discussed below.

Code of Ethics
Many leaders today set forth their organizations’ values and codes of ethics in written documents. Written statements have the advantage of explicitly stating the 
company’s position on ethical and moral issues, and they serve as benchmarks for judging both company policies and actions and individual conduct. A growing  number of organizations have added a code of ethics to their list of formal statements and public pronouncements.

According to a study by the Center for Business Ethics, 90 percent of Fortune 500 companies now have a code of ethics. The lesson from these companies is that it 
is never enough to assume that activities are being conducted ethically, nor can it be assumed that employees understand that they are expected to act with integrity.

Leaders must consistently communicate to members the value of not only observing ethical codes but also reporting ethical violations. “Gray areas” must be 
identified and openly discussed with members, and procedures created to offer guidance when issues in these areas arise. It is generally believed that the more an 
organization’s employees are aware of proper conduct, the more likely they are to do the right thing. A code of ethics is of no consequence if an ethical corporate 
culture and top management support are lacking; it is more than just a formal document stipulating company policies and procedures.

Some organizations include ethics as part of their mission. Such mission statements generally define ethical values as well as corporate culture, and contain 
language about company responsibility, quality of product, and treatment of employees. Developing an effective code of ethics program should incorporate some key components: leaders model expected behaviors, ethics is a core element of the corporate culture, everyone participates in creating the guidelines, ethics is discussed openly, and rules are applied consistently. Exhibit 10.4 on page 383, featuring Starbucks Corporation’s mission statement, contains a set of six guiding principles that illustrates how the company’s mission and core values translate into ethical business practices.

Ethics Committees
In order to encourage ethical behavior, some organizations are setting up  ethics committees charged with overseeing ethical issues. In other organizations the 
responsibility is given to an ombudsperson. An ethics ombudsperson is a single person entrusted with the responsibility of acting as the organization’s conscience. He or she hears and investigates complaints and points out potential ethics failures to top management. In many large corporations, ethics departments with full-time staff are charged with helping employees deal with day-to-day ethical problems or questions.

Training Programs
Training provides the opportunity for everyone in the organization to be informed and educated on the key aspects of the culture. Training teaches employees how to incorporate ethics into daily behavior. In short, training helps to align member behaviors with the organization’s values. Starbucks Corporation uses new employee 
training to ingrain values such as embracing diversity, taking personal responsibility, and treating everyone with respect.

Many scholars and practitioners now believe that business schools need to play a greater role in instilling ethical values in their students, who are, after all, future business practitioners.103,104 Students must come to embrace a holistic view of business performance that involves not only the economic imperative of profit generation but also the fiduciary imperative of ethically anchored and socially responsible behavior.105,106

Disclosure Mechanisms
As part of enforcing ethical conduct, employees are encouraged to report any knowledge of ethical violations. Whistle blowing is employee disclosure of illegal or 
unethical practices on the part of the organization. In 2002, the scandals surrounding companies such as Enron and WorldCom left many people wondering why no one blew the whistle on these practices sooner. Later that year, TIME Magazine named three women, including Sherron Watkins of Enron Corporation, as People of the Year. Whistle blowing can be risky for those who choose to do it—they have been known to suffer consequences including being ostracized by coworkers, demoted or transferred to less-desirable jobs, and even losing their jobs.107 Policies that protect employees from going through these setbacks will signal management’s genuine commitment to enforce ethical behavior. Some organizations have done this by setting up hotlines to give employees a confidential way to report unethical or illegal actions. According to a report from nonprofit organization Public Concern at Work, employees are now twice as likely to blow the whistle on workplace wrong doing as they were five years ago.108

When faced with difficult decisions, values-based leaders know what they stand for, and they have the courage to act on their principles regardless of external pres
sures. A manager’s values, however, are shaped by differences in national or societal culture. The following section describes a framework for understanding the bases of broad national cultural differences.


