Changing Demographics and Diversity

In the United States and many other societies of the industrialized world, multiculturalism is a fact of life.117 A number of factors have contributed to make diversity a key leadership issue in the United States. Among these are the Civil Rights Acts, which outlawed most types of employment discrimination; increased immigration, which has resulted in a more racially and ethnically mixed population; and the trend of globalization, which has increased the need for multicultural awareness and understanding. Add to these factors the changing demographic landscape of the United States. Demographic diversity is any characteristic that serves as a basis for social categorization and self-identification.118

Diversity is a way of life in just about every organization today because of ongoing demographic trends reflected in the increasing number of Hispanics, African
Americans, and Asians in the workforce; an aging population; and a growing female labor force.119,120 The population of these minority groups is growing at a faster 
rate than the overall society.121 The U.S. Census Bureau projects that the number of Hispanics, already the largest minority group, will increase to 15 percent of 
the population by 2021. This group grew by over 40 percent in the 1990s. The percentage of African-Americans is expected to increase to 14 percent by 2021. Longer term, Caucasians are expected to become a minority by 2050. Four states (California, Hawaii, New Mexico, and Texas) currently have the distinction of having a combined minority population greater than white populations.122
 
The aging trend has now created what some are calling generational diversity in the workplace.123 For the first time, four distinct generations comprise today’s 
workforce—the Traditionalists (1900–1945), the Baby Boomers (1946–1964), the Generation Xers (1965–1980), and the Millennials (1981–2000). Summed up, 
these trends all point to one issue: diversity. Many CEOs of Fortune 500 companies have acknowledged that diversity is a strategic business imperative. Diversity is the inclusion of all groups at all levels in an organization.

The United States has been described as the “melting pot” of cultures. The thinking not long ago was that to make it in this society, one had to blend in with the 
mainstream culture. Individuals from different cultures responded to this pressure by trying to lose or disguise their identity—adopting new names, changing accents, 
and abandoning old customs, traditions, and values. The prevailing belief was that to get ahead, one had to assimilate into mainstream culture. Job opportunities favored those who blended in. Now, however, it would appear that the melting pot concept has been replaced by the salad bowl concept. Rather than assimilation, the emphasis has shifted toward cultural integration without necessarily losing one’s identity.

Diversity in the workplace, brought on by a multicultural society, is no longer viewed as a liability but an asset. Many organizations have found that tapping into 
diversity brings new and innovative ways of viewing traditional problems, and that diversity provides a rich mix of talents for today’s globally competitive marketplace.

In this section, we explore the current state of diversity in the U.S. workforce, the impact of globalization on diversity, reasons for embracing diversity, obstacles 
to achieving diversity, and strategies organizations are employing to achieve full diversity.

Current State of Workforce Diversity
Diversity describes differences resulting from age, gender, race, ethnicity, religion, and sexual orientation. Dramatic changes are taking place in the workforce. National demographic changes, as well as greater minority representation in the workforce, have accounted for the most significant increase in workforce  diversity.124 

One study described the impact of African-American and Latino women in the U.S. labor movement as “ a force to be reckoned with.”125 In 2005, African-American and 
Hispanic employees made up over 25 percent of the workforce, while the percentage of Caucasian males decreased from 51 percent to 44 percent.126 A greater likelihood exists that individuals will find themselves leading or under the leadership of someone demographically different from them.

In the new work environment, workers must often share work duties and space with coworkers of diverse races, social backgrounds, and cultures.127 The passage 
of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) has further broadened the scope of diversity in the workplace. Today, the chances of working with a disabled coworker 
are much higher than a decade ago. In the last 25 years, attitudes toward diversity have and continue to change. There is now talk of diversity management competency in recruiting and training leaders. There is a growing interest in research on investigating the impact of diversity in management and firm performance.128,129 Companies that can effectively manage diversity will be able to recruit from a larger pool, train and retain superior performers, and maximize the benefits of this diverse workforce.130 More organizations are highlighting diversity in their advertising, because they are competing for talent in a tight labor market, and they recognize that demographic shifts are going to dramatically change their market
place over the next 20 years.

The Impact of Globalization on Diversity
The other factor that has led companies to value and manage diversity is globalization. Corporations are becoming more global and hence more ethnically diverse 
as well.131,132 The economies of the world are interconnected, and changes in one economy quickly affect others. Corporations are becoming increasingly global,133 
pursuing merger and acquisition strategies around the world. Globalization has led firms to originate, produce, and market their products and services worldwide.

The emergence of a largely borderless economic world has created a new reality for organizations of all shapes and sizes. A global labor market is emerging, 
dominated by India and China.134 United States-based companies such as PepsiCola, Coca-Cola, Procter & Gamble, GE, GM, AT&T, Ford, Nike, General Mills, 
Boeing, McDonald’s, and many others have established a significant presence in China and India; partly motivated by cheap labor and a sizable consumer market.135 
They face competition from European companies such as Daimler-Benz, Nestlé of Switzerland, Canada’s Northern Telecom, Siemens of Germany, Sweden’s Ericsson, and many others who also have a significant presence in the United States. These corporations are having to deal with a diverse cross-cultural workforce, customers, competitors, suppliers and financial institutions.136 Collaboration among these companies has become a common way to meet the demands of global competition and to overcome the growing trend of consumer ethnocentrism, which is the tendency to want to purchase products from one’s own country rather than a foreign country. Global strategic alliances between independent firms for the purpose of achieving common goals and overcoming domestic country bias are becoming quite prevalent. General Mills and Nestlé of Switzerland created Cereal Partners Worldwide for the purpose of fine-tuning Nestlé’s European cereal and for marketing and distributing General Mills cereals worldwide.

In this global environment, understanding cultural differences and learning to deal effectively with partners from different cultures will be critical. This may par
tially explain why the number of foreign-born managers being appointed to lead U.S. companies is increasing. Multinational companies are interested in recruiting leaders who have multicultural experiences for obvious reasons. To be successful in the global marketplace, companies need to recruit executives with global mindsets 
and cross-cultural leadership abilities. Despite this reality, 85 percent of Fortune 500 companies have reported a shortage of global managers with the necessary skills.137

Almost every employee in the workforce today is dealing with a wider range of cultures than ever before. The challenge for organizational leaders is to recognize 
that each person can bring values and strengths to the workplace based on his or her own unique backgrounds. Also, leaders must recognize that cultural values 
and norms can shape employee receptivity to leadership styles. For example, some argue that certain cultural value types (such as individualistic or collectivistic cul
tures) may enhance or weaken employee receptivity to transactional and transformational leadership styles.138 As we discussed in Chapter 9, transformational leaders inspire their followers by focusing on the importance of team values and collective interests, while transactional leaders focus on clarifying roles and task requirements and offering specific rewards based on established performance standards.139 By extension, we can assume that employees from a collectivistic culture may be more receptive to a transformational than a transactional leadership style.

