Leadership and Major Motivation Theories

In this section we discuss motivation and leadership, the motivation process (which explains how motivation affects behavior), and three classifications of motivation 
theories (content, process, and reinforcement). We also briefly describe the need to balance professional and personal needs.

Motivation and Leadership
Motivation is anything that affects behavior in pursuing a certain outcome. Motivation is a quest for personal gain.27 So why do we often do the things we do? Because we tend to seek to satisfy our self-interest.28 The pursuit of happiness and satisfaction is fundamental to motivation.29 Although there are exceptions, there is support for the belief that making employees happier and healthier increases their effort, contributions, and productivity,30 and that satisifaction leads to good organizational citizenship behavior—going above and beyond the call of duty.31 Satisfied employees can have a postive impact on customers’ satisfaction with firm performance.32 Satisfied employees stay on the job longer.33 Joie de Vivre Hospitality CEO, Chip Conley, says that keeping staff happy is a top priority because satisfied workers stay in their jobs longer, and they treat customers better.34 Employees can be motivated to make a positive 
difference.35 As a leader, your job is to motivate your followers to work hard.36

So, if you want to motivate someone, answer their often-unasked question, “What’s in it for me?” If you give people what they want, they will in turn give you 
what you want—creating win-win situations. Unfortunately, it’s complex (easier said than done), but you will learn how in the rest of this chapter. The first step is to understand the motivation process.37

The Motivation Process
Through the motivation process, people go from need to motive to behavior to consequence to satisfaction or dissatisfaction. For example, you are thirsty (need) and have a drive (motive) to get a drink. You get a drink (behavior) that quenches (consequence and satisfaction) your thirst. However, if you could not get a drink, or a drink of what you really wanted, you would be dissatisfied. Satisfaction is usually short-lived. Getting that drink satisfied you, but sooner or later you will need another drink. For this reason, the motivation process has a feedback loop. Giving rewards as consequences for meeting organizational objectives leads to satisfaction and increased performance.38 See Exhibit 3.5 for an illustration of the motivation process.

EXHIBIT 3.5 The Motivation Process
Need -> Motive -> Behavior -> Consequence -> Satisfaction or Dissatisfaction -> Feedback -> Need

Some need or want motivates all behavior. However, needs and motives are complex: We don’t always know what our needs are, or why we do the things we do. Have you ever done something and not known why you did it? Understanding needs will help you to better understand motivation and behavior.39 You will gain a better understanding of why people do the things they do.

Like traits, motives cannot be observed; but you can observe behavior and infer what the person’s motive is (attribution theory). However, it is not easy to know why  people behave the way they do, because people do the same things for different reasons. Also, people often attempt to satisfy several needs at once. Herb Kelleher, founder and chairman of Southwest Airlines, said that superior performance is not achieved through ordinary employee efforts; it takes good citizenship behavior.40 Herb Kelleher focused on making work fun to motivate Southwest employees to be organizational citizens, and set many airline industry records, despite the fact that employees were paid less than at traditional airlines. David Neeleman, founder of JetBlue Airways, is described as someone who can inspire employees to organizational citizenship through the sheer force of his personality and the example of his dedication.