Equity Theory
People want to be treated fairly.66 If employees perceive organizational decisions and managerial actions to be unfair or unjust, they are likely to experience feelings of anger, outrage, and resentment.67 Employees have to believe they are being treated fairly if they are to work together effectively.68 Equity theory is primarily J. Stacy Adams’s motivation theory, in which people are said to be motivated to seek social equity in the rewards they receive (output) for their performance 
(input).69 Equity theory proposes that people are motivated when their perceived inputs equal outputs.

Rewarding People Equitably
Through the equity theory process, people compare their inputs (effort, experience, seniority, status, intelligence, and so forth) and outputs (praise, recognition, 
pay, benefits, promotions, increased status, supervisor’s approval, and so forth) to that of relevant others. A relevant other could be a coworker or group of employees from the same or different organizations, or even from a hypothetical situation. Notice that our definition says perceived and not actual inputs to outputs. Others may perceive that equity actually exists, and that the person complaining about inequity is wrong.

Equitable distribution of pay is crucial to organizations.70 Unfortunately, manyemployees tend to inflate their own efforts or performance when comparing them selves to others. Employees also tend to overestimate what others earn. Employees  may be very satisfied and motivated until they find out that a relevant other is 
earning more for the same job, or earning the same for doing less work. A comparison with relevant others leads to one of three conclusions: The employee is 
underrewarded, overrewarded, or equitably rewarded. When inequity is perceived, employees attempt to reduce it by reducing input or increasing output.

Motivating with Equity Theory
Research supporting equity theory is mixed, because people who believe they are overrewarded usually don’t change their behavior. Instead, they often rationalize 
that they deserve the outputs. A recent study used equity theory, and the results did support it.71 One view of equity is that it is like Herzberg’s maintenance factors. 

When employees are not dissatisfied, they are not actively motivated; but maintenance factors do demotivate when employees are dissatisfied. According to equity 
theory, when employees believe they are equitably rewarded they are not actively motivated. However, when employees believe they are underrewarded, they are 
demotivated.

Using equity theory in practice can be difficult, because you don’t always know who the employee’s reference group is, nor their view of inputs and outcomes. 
However, this theory does offer some useful general recommendations:
1. Managers should be aware that equity is based on perception, which may not be correct. It is possible for the manager to create equity or inequity. Some managers have favorite subordinates who get special treatment; others don’t. So don’t play favorites; treat employees equally but in unique ways.
2. Rewards should be equitable. When employees perceive that they are not treated fairly, morale and performance problems occur. Employees producing at the same level should be given equal rewards. Those producing less should get less.
3. High performance should be rewarded, but employees must understand the inputs needed to attain certain outputs. When incentive pay is used, there should be clear standards specifying the exact requirements to achieve the incentive. A manager should be able to objectively tell others why one person got a higher merit raise than another did.