Goal-Setting Theory
The research conducted by E. A. Locke and others has revealed that setting objectives has a positive effect on motivation and performance.77 High-achievement, motivated individuals consistently engage in goal setting.78 Goal-setting theory proposes that specific, difficult goals motivate people. Our behavior has a purpose, which is usually to fulfill a need. Goals give us a sense of purpose as to why we are working to accomplish a given task.79

Writing Objectives
To help you to write effective objectives that meet the criteria you will learn next, use the model. The parts of the writing objectives model are (1) To + (2) action verb + (3) singular, specific, and measurable result to be achieved + (4) target date. The model is shown in Model 3.1, which is adapted from Max E. Douglas’s model.

Criteria for Objectives
For an objective to be effective, it should include the four criteria listed in steps 3 and 4 of the writing objectives model:
1. Singular result. To avoid confusion, each objective should contain only one end result. When multiple objectives are listed together, one may be met but the other(s) may not.
2. Specific. The objective should state the exact level of performance expected.80
3. Measurable. The saying, “what gets measured gets done,” is true. If people are to achieve objectives, they must be able to observe and measure their progress regularly to monitor progress and to determine if the objective has been met. 81
4. Target date. A specific date should be set for accomplishing the objective. When people have a deadline, they usually try harder to get the task done on time.82 If people are simply told to do it when they can, they don’t tend to get around to it until they have to. It is also more effective to set a specific date, such as October 29, rather than a set time, such as in two weeks, because you can forget when the time began and should end. Some objectives are ongoing and do not 
require a stated date. The target date is indefinite until it is changed, such as the Domino’s objective in Model 3.1.

In addition to the four criteria from the model, there are three other criteria that do not always fit within the model:
1. Difficult but achievable. A number of studies show that individuals perform better with moderately difficult objectives rather than (1) easy objectives, (2) objectives that are too difficult, or (3) simply told “do your best.”83 Be realistic about what you can achieve. Don’t over-promise or try to do too much. GE’s Jack 
Welch incorporated “stretch goals” in the early 1990s that led to dramatic improvements in productivity, efficiency, and profitability. Welch got everyone to focus on doing things quicker, better, and cheaper.
2. Participatively set. People that participate in setting their objectives generally outperform those that are assigned objectives.
3. Commitment. For objectives to be met, employees must accept them. If employees are not committed to striving for the objective, even if they meet the other 
criteria, they may not meet the objective.88 Using participation helps get employees to accept objectives.

Microsoft has a long tradition of having individuals set goals as part of its high performance-based culture. All employees are trained to set “SMART” (Specific, 
Measurable, Achievable, Results-based, and Time-specific) written goals. Managers are trained to assist in the goal-setting process, including how to provide relevant performance feedback during the review process.

Using Goal Setting to Motivate Employees
Goal setting might be the most effective management tool available. Organizational behavior scholars rated goal-setting theory as number one in importance among 73 management theories.89 Need we say anything more about it besides to follow the guidelines above?
